[KEP] Gruduation Criteria and initial implementability for Gateway APIs (#1885)
Kong/kubernetes-ingress-controller: keps/0002-kong-gateway-api.md

---
title: Kong Gateway API

> status: implementable (see [graduation criteria](#graduation-criteria) for specifics)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
status: milestone 1 implementable (see [graduation criteria](#graduation-criteria) for specifics)
```

[chart]:https://github.com/kong/charts
[kong-admin-api]:https://docs.konghq.com/gateway-oss/latest/admin-api/
[anns]:https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/overview/working-with-objects/annotations/

##### Operational Mode 2: Provisioned Gateways

**NOTE**: required for milestone 3 in [graduation criteria](#graduation-criteria)

TODO: work on this operational mode has not been started yet. At the time of writing our [operator][kong-operator] was still unready to take on this functionality, and maintainers were not comfortable with adding this operator-style functionality to the KIC.

[kong-operator]:https://github.com/kong/kong-operator

###### Metrics

**NOTE**: required for milestone 3 in [graduation criteria](#graduation-criteria)

TODO

###### Automatic Upgrades, HealthChecking and Rollbacks

**NOTE**: required for milestone 3 in [graduation criteria](#graduation-criteria)

TODO

##### Additional Considerations

- https://github.com/Kong/kubernetes-ingress-controller/issues/702 is related to our single controller multi-proxy lifecycle management concerns

#### HTTPRoute Controller

**NOTE**: required for milestone 1 in [graduation criteria](#graduation-criteria)

> The HTTPRoute controller is fairly straightforward, which backend proxy is responsible is based on which Gateway its attached to in the `parentRefs`, but then the resource otherwise gets parsed, converted into Kong types, and posted to `/config` like any other API resource that currently exists.

Reviewer: Is this (_and posted to `/config`_) to mean that we intend to drop DB mode for GW API?

Author: If you mean am I pushing for a direction where we use the existing configuration option, and NOT take the time to write the REST layer for DB mode and then take advantage of that as a part of this effort, the answer is yes. The long and short of it is that I feel we're quite behind the curve on implementing Gateway APIs and I want to push for a very lightweight, light touch milestone 1.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The HTTPRoute controller is fairly straightforward, which backend proxy is responsible is based on which Gateway its attached to in the `parentRefs`, but then the resource otherwise gets parsed (by `parser.Build()`), converted into Kong types, and posted to Kong like any other API resource that currently exists, using the `KongState`, proxy and `sendconfig` abstractions as they are used today.
```

#### Milestone 2 - Alpha Quality - Extended API Support (provisional)

- [ ] an initial implementation of `TCPRoute` is added which includes support for the majority of features
- [ ] integration tests added which cover all the features of `TCPRoute`
- [ ] an initial implementation of `UDPRoute` is added which includes support for the majority of features
- [ ] integration tests added which cover all the features of `UDPRoute`
- [ ] an initial implementation of `TLSRoute` is added which includes support for the majority of features
- [ ] integration tests added which cover all the features of `TLSRoute`

#### Milestone 3 - Alpha Quality - Operator Support (provisional)

- [ ] operator support for provisioning and managing the lifecycle of `Gateway` resources is added
- [ ] operator has support for automatic upgrades of provisioned `Gateways`
- [ ] operator has support for health checking and rollback mechanisms for provisioned `Gateways`
- [ ] operator has prometheus metrics which capture information about `Gateway` operations, including error alerts for failures e.t.c.
- [ ] integration tests added which cover all features of `Gateway`

> #### Milestone 4 - Beta Quality (provisional)

Reviewer: The `alpha`/`beta` wording as used in this document may be confusing, as it may interfere with the `alpha`/`beta` suffixes we use for KIC versioning. Would "feature preview" be a better word than "alpha"/"beta"?

&lt;/bikeshedding>

Author: So I had some anticipation of this and this ties directly into this discussion: https://github.com/Kong/team-k8s/discussions/154 about feature gates. I'm thinking in terms of feature gate maturity levels. If we ultimately decide as a team that we're not in favor of feature gates then yeah maybe a different wording makes sense, like preview.

Reviewer: Discussed over zoom: Kong/team-k8s#154 is an open discussion pondering the two known approaches to enabling/disabling GW API support in KIC, and the decision on that matter is purely technical and doesn't need to block this KEP.
